Correspondence and report from His 
Majesty’s Consul at Boma respecting 
the Administration of the 
Independent State of the Congo. 

No.1 


TAe Earl of Cromer to the Marquess of Lansdowne. — 
(Received February 9.) 


(Extract.) 


On the Nile, near Kiro, January 21, 1903 


I HAVE just visited the Belgian stations of Kiro and Lado, as also 
the station ot Gondokoro in the Uganda Protectorate. 


Your Lordship may like to receive some remarks on the impressions 
I derived as regards the Belgian positions on the Upper Nile. I 
should, in the first instance, observe that Commandant Hanolet, who 
is in charge of the district, was absent in the interior of the country ; 
but Sir Reginald Wingate and myself were most courteously recetved 
by the officers in command at Kiro and Lado. 


Fom the. point of view of appearance, the two Belgian stations 
contrast favourably with any of the Soudanese stations on the Nile, 
and still more favourably with G-ondokoro in the Uganda 
Protectorate. The principal dwelling-houses are of brick. They seem 
to be well built. The stations are kept scrupulously clean. The troops 
are well housed. Flourishing gardens have been created. I counted the 
graves of nine Europeans at Kiro, all of whom died of fever, but Iam 
informed that the health of the place is now greatly Improved. 


I had heard so many and such contradictory accounts of the Belgian 
Administra-tion that i was very desirous of ascertaining some concise 
and definite evidence on this subject. During a hurried visit, and with 


1 


opportunities of observation confined to' the banks of the river, I 
scarcely anticipated that I should be able to arrive at any independent 
opinion on the point at issue. I saw and beard, however, quite 
enough to gain an insight into the spirit which pervades the 
Administration. 


It must be remembered that the 1,100 miles of country which I 
traversed between Khartoum and Gondokoro has, until recently, 
been the prey of slave-dealers, Egyptian Pashas, and dervishes. Under 
the circumstances, it might well have been expected that much time 
would be required to inspire confidence in the intentions of the new 
Government. It is, however, certain that, with the exception of a 
portion of the Nuer tribe, who live in a very remote region on the 
upper waters of the Sobat, confidence has been completely 
established in those districts which ate under British rule. 


Except in the un- inhabitable “Sudd" region, numerous villages are 
dotted along the banks of the river, fhe people, far from flying at the 
approach of white men as was formerly the case, run along the banks, 
making signs for the steamer to stop. It is clear that the Baris, 
Shilluks, and Dinkas place the utmost trust and confidence in the 
British officers with whom they are brought in contact. In spite of 
the difficulties of communicating with them through an interpreter— 
himself but slightly educated — it was impossible to mistake their 
manifest signs and expressions of security and content. They Hock 
into the Settlements without fear; and if as often happens, they will 
not work, it is merely because they are lazy and have few wants,’ not 
because they entertain doubt that they will be paid for working. 
These remarks apply equally to Gondokoro, although I was only able 
to see a few of the natives there. I had not time to visit the principal 
Bari village, which lies at some litt'e distance from the river. 


The contrast when once Congolese territory is entered is remarkable. 
From the frontier to Gondokoro is about 80 miles. ' The proper left, 
or western, bank of the river is Belgian. The opposite bank is either 
under the Soudanese or the Uganda Government, there are 
numerous islands, arid as all these ate under British rule— for the 
thalweg, which, under Treaty, is the Belgian frontier, skirts the 
western bank of the river. 


I cannot say that I had an opportunity of seeing a full 30 miles of 
Belgian territory. At the same time, I saw a good deal, and I noticed 
that, whereas there were numerous villages and huts on the eastern 
hank and on the islands, on the Belgian side not a sign of a village 
existed. Indeed, I do not think that any one of our party saw a single 
human being in Belgian territory, except the Belgian officers and men 
and the wives and children of the latter. Moreover, not a single native 
was to be seen either at Kiro or Lade, I asked the Swedish officer at 
Kiro whether he saw much of the natives. He replied in the negative, 
adding that the nearest Bavi village was situated at some distance in 
the interior. The Italian officer at Lado, in reply to the same question, 
stated that the nearest native village was seven hours distant. 


The reason of all this is obvious enough. The Belgians are disliked. 
The people fly from them, and it is no wonder they should do so, for 
I am informed that the soldiers' are allowed full liberty to plunder, 
and that payments are rarely made for supplies. The British officers 
wander, practically alone, over most parts of the country, either on 
tours of inspection or on shooting "expeditions. I understand that no 
Belgian officer can move outside the settlements without a strong 


guard. 


It appears to me that the facts which I have stated above afford 
amply sufficient evidence of the spirit which animates the Belgian 
Administration, if, indeed, Administration it can be called. The 
Government, so far as I could judge, is conducted almost exclusively 
on commercial principles, and, even judged by that standard, it would 
appear that those principles are somewhat short-sighted. 


Inclosure NO 2 (Translation) 


THE Government of the Independent State of the Congo have 
examined the despatch from the Foreign Office, dated the 8th 
August last, which was communicated to the Signatory Powers of the 
Berlin Act, and declare themselves in agreement with His Majesty's 
Government on two fundamental points, viz., that natives ought to 


be treated with humanity and gradually led into the paths of 
civilization, and that freedom of commerce in the Conventional 
Basin of the Congo ought to be entire and complete. 


They deny, however, that the manner in which the State is 
administered involves a systematic regime "of cruelty or oppression," 
and that the principle of commercial freedom would introduce 
modifications in the rights of property as universally understood, 
seeing that there is not a word to this efiect in the Berlin Act. The 
Congo State observes that there is in that Act no provision which 
would sanction restrictions of any kind on the exercise of the rights 
of property, or give to one Signatory Power the right of intervention 
in the interior administration of another. It desires faithfully to 
observe the Berlin Act, that great International Act which binds all 
Signatory or adhering Powers, according to the clear grammatical 
sense of the text, which none has power either to take from or add 
to. 


The English note observes that it is within the last few years that a 
definite shape has been assumed by the campaign conducted in 

England against the Congo State, on the twofold pretext of the ill- 
treatment of natives and the existence of commercial monopolies. 


It is indeed worthy of remark that this campaign dates from the time 
when the prosperity of the State became assured. The State had been 
founded for years, and administered in the same way as it is now, its 
principles in regard to the State-ownership of vacant lands, and the 
manner in which its armed forces were organized and recruited, were 
known to the public, without any interest in the matter being shown 
by the philanthropists and traders to whose opinion the note begins 
by referring. This was the period during which the State Budget could 
only be balanced by means of the King-Sovereign's subsidies and 
Belgian loans, and when the commerce of the Congo did not attract 
attention. The term "Congo atrocities " was at that time only used in 
connexion with " the alleged ill-treatment of African natives by 
English and other adventurers in the Congo Eree State. "* After 1895 
the trade of the Congo State developed remarkably, and the amount 
of its exports shows a progressive increase from 10 millions in 1895 
to 50 millions in 1902. It is also about this time that the anti- Congo 


movement took shape. As the State gave increased proof of vitality 
and progress, the campaign became mote active, reliance being 
placed on a few individual and isolated cases with a view to using the 
interests of humanity as a pretext and concealing the real object of a 
covetousness which, in its impatience, has betrayed itself in the 
wtitings of pamphleteers and in the speeches of Members of the 
House of Commons, in which the abolition and partition of the 
Congo State has been clearly put forward. 


Such being the object in view, it became necessary to bring a whole 
series of charges against the State. So far as the humanitarian side of 
the question is concerned, the alleged cases of violence offered to 
natives have once more been brought forward and re-edited ad 
infinitum. Eor in all the meetings, writings, and speeches which have 
latterly been directed against the State, it is always the same facts 
which are brought up, and the same evidence which is produced. 
With regard to the economic side of the question, the State has been 
accused of having violated the Act of Berlin, notwithstanding the 
legal opinions of such lawyers as are most qualified to speak to the 
point, which afford ample legal justification both for its commercial 
and for its land system. With regard to the political side, a heresy in 
international law has been imagined, viz., that a State, the 
independence and sovereignty of which are absolute, should, at the 
same time, owe its position to the intervention of foreign Powers. 


With regard to the cases of ill-treatment of natives, we attach special 
importance to those which, according to the note, have been 
reported in the despatches of His Majesty's Consular Agents. At the 
sitting of the House of Commons on the 11th March, 1903, Lord 
Cranborne referred to these official documents, and we have 
requested through his Excellency Sir C. Phipps that the British 
Government will make known to us the facts alluded to. We repeat 
the request. 


The Government of the State have, however, never denied that 
crimes and offences ate committed in the Congo, as in every other 
country or Colony. The note itself recognizes that these offences 
have been brought before the Tribunals, and that the criminals have 
been punished. The conclusion to be drawn from this is that the 


State fulfils its mission ; the conclusion actually drawn is that " many 
individual instances of cruelty have taken place in the Congo State," 
and that " the number of convictions falls considerably short of the 
number of offences actually committed." This deduction does not 
appear necessarily to follow. It would seem more logical to say that 
the severe sentences inflicted will serve as a wholesome example, and 
that a decrease of crime may on that account be looked for. If some 
offences have indeed, in the extensive territories of the State, escaped 
the vigilance of the judicial authorities, this is a circumstance which is 
not peculiar to the Congo State. 


The English note proceeds chiefly on hypotheses and suppositions : " 
It was alleged .... It is reported .... It is also reported... ." and it even 
says that " His Majesty's Government do not know precisely to what 
extent these accusations may be true." This is an acknowledgment 
that, in the eyes of the British Government themselves, the 
accusations in question are neither established nor proved. And, 
indeed, the violence, the passion, and the improbability of many of 
these accusations must raise doubt in an impartial mind as to their 
genuineness. To give but one example : — a great deal has been 
made of the statement that, in a train coming down from 
Leopoldville to Matadi, three carriages were full of slaves, a dozen of 
whom were in chains and guarded by soldiers. The Governor- 
General was asked for a report on the case. He replied ; " The 
individuals represented as composing a convoy of slaves were, the 
great majority of them (125), levies proceeding from the district of 
Lualaba-Kasai, Lake Leopold I, and the Bangalas to the camp in the 
Lower Congo. Annexed you -wilt find lists of these persons. As 
regards the men in chains, they were certain individuals on whom 
sentence had been passed by the territorial Tribunal at Basoko, and 
who were on their way to undergo their sentence at the central prison 
at Boma. They are Nos. 3642 to 3649 on the prison register at 
Boma." 


In the same way, quite a recent " interview," in which the usual 
accusations of cruelty were reproduced, is due to a person formerly in 
the employ of the State, who was " declared unfit for service," and 
who has failed to persuade the State to accept his proposal to write 
for the press articles favourable to the Administration. 


The note ignores the replies, contradictions, and corrections which 
the attacks on the Agents of the State have occasioned at the various 
times when they have taken place. It ignores the official declarations 
publicly made by the Government of the State in June last, after the 
debate in the House of Commons on the 20th May, the report of 
which is annexed to the note. We also annex the text of these 
declarations which dealt, by anticipation, with the considerations set 
forth in the despatch of the 8th August. 


The only fresh cause of complaint which the note brings forward-— 
doubtless with the object of explaining the not unimportant fact that 
the English Consul, who has resided in the Congo since 1901, does 
not appear to support, by his personal authority, the accusa-tions of 
private individuals — is that this Agent has been " principally 
occupied in the investigation of complaints preferred by British 
subjects." The impression which one would derive from this is that 
such complaints have been exceptionally numerous. JS.0 doubt the 
Consul has, on different occasions, communicated with the 
Administration at Boma in the interests of his countrymen, but the 
subjects of his representations, if one may judge by such of their 
number as the English Legation has had to bring to the notice of the 
Central Government at Brussels, do not appear, either in number or 
importance, to have been more than matters of every day 
administrative routine : some cases in particular concerned the 
regulation of the succession to property in the Congo left by 
deceased English subjects; the object in others was to repair errors of 
judicial procedure, such as occur elsewhere, and it is not even alleged 
that the proper action has not been taken upon these representations. 
The same Consul, who was appointed in 1898, wrote to the 
Governor-General on the 2nd July, 1901, as follows : — 


" I pray believe me when I express now, not only for myself, but for 
my fellow- countrymen in this part of Africa, pur very sincere 
appreciation of your efforts on behalf of the general community — 
efforts to promote goodwill among all and to bring together the 
various elements of our local life." 


IS or do the predecessors of Mr. E. Casement — for English Consuls 
with jurisdiction in the Congo were appointed by His Majesty 


Government as long ago as 1888 — appear to have been absorbed in 
the examination of innumerable complaints ; at all events, that is not 
the view taken in the Report (the only one published) by Consul 
Pickersegill, who, by the mere fact of giving an account of his journey 
into the interior of the Congo as far as Stanley Falls, disproves the 
alleged impossibility for the English Consular Agents to form an 
opinion de visu in regard to every part of their district. 


With regard to the charges against the administrative system of the 
State, the note deals with taxes, public armed forces, and what is 
termed forced labour. 


It is, at bottom, the contributions made by the Congo natives to the 
public charges which are criticized, as if there existed a single country 
ort Colony in which the inhabitants do not, under one form or 
another, bear a part in such charges. A State without resources is 
inconceivable. On what legitimate grounds could the exemption of 
natives from all taxes be based, seeing that they are the first to benefit 
by the material and moral advantages Introduced into Africa? As they 
have no money, a contribution in the shape of labour is required 
from them. It has been said that, if Africa is ever to be redeemed 
from barbarism, it must be by getting the negro to understand the 
meaning of work by the obligation of paying taxes : — 


"It is a question (of native labour) which has engaged my most 
careful attention in connection with West Africa and other Colonies. 
To listen to the right honourable gentleman, you would almost think 
that it would be a good thing for the native to be idle. I think it is a 
good thing for him to be industrious ; and by every means in our 
power we must teach him to work No people ever have lived in the 
world's history who would not work. In the interests of the natives all 
over Africa, we have to teach them to work." 


Such was the language used by Mr. Chamberlain in the House of 
Commons on the 6th August, 1901 ; and still more recently he 
expressed himself as follows : 


"We are all of us taxed, and taxed heavily. Is that a system of forced 
labour % To say that because we put a tax on the native therefore he 


is reduced to a condition of servitude and of forced labour is, to my 
mind, absolutely ridiculous. It is perfectly fair to my mind that the 
native should contribute something towards the cost of administering 
the country." 


(House of Commons, the 9th March, 190a.) 


" If that really is the last word of civilization, if we are to proceed on 
the assumption that the nearer the native or any human being comes 
to a pig the more desirable is his condition, of course I have nothing 
to say I must continue to believe that, at all even is, the progress of 
the native in civilization will not be secured until he has been 
convinced of the necessity and the dignity of labour. Therefore, I 
think that anything we reasonably can do to induce the native to 
labour is a desirable thing. And he defended the principle of taxing 
the native on the ground that " the existence of the tax is an 
inducement to him to work." (House of Commons, the 24th March, 


1903.) 


Moreover, it is to be observed that in nearly every part of Aftica the 
natives are taxed. In the Transvaal every native pays a "head tax" of 
21. ; in the Orange .River Colony he is subject to a "poll tax;" in 
Southern Rhodesia, Bechuanaland, Basutoland, Uganda, and Natal a 
"hut tax" is levied; in Cape Colony we find a "hut tax" and a" labour 
tax ; "in German East Africa also a tax is levied on huts, payable 
either in money, in kind, or in labour. This species of tax has also 
been applied in the Sierra Leone Protectorate, where payment could 
be made " in kind by rice or palm nuts/' and it has been suggested 
that work on roads and useful works should be accepted in lieu of 
payment in money or produce. 


The legality of a tax is, therefore, not affected by the mode of its 
payment, whether in money or in kind, so long as the amount is not 
excessive. It is certainly not so in the Congo, where the work done by 
the native does not represent more than forty hours' work a-month. 
Such work, moreover, is paid for, and the tax in kind thus gives the 
native as it were some return for his labour. 


Payment of taxes is obligatory everywhere ; and non-payment 
involves measures of compulsion. The regulations under which the 
hut- tax is levied impose on the native, for non-payment, such 
penalties as imprisonment and forced labour. Nor in the Congo is 
payment of taxes optional. Repressive measures have occasionally 
been rendered necessary elsewhere by the refusal of natives to 
conform to the law, e.g., the disturbances at Sierra Leone, in 
connexion with which an English publicist, speaking of the police 
force, states : 


"Between July 1894 and February 1896 no fewer than sixty-two 
convictions, admittedly representing a small proportion of offences 
actually committed, were recorded against .them for flogging, 
plundering, and generally maltreating the natives." 


Further instances might be recalled of the opposition encountered 
among native populations to the institution of governmental 
regulations. Civilization necessarily comes into collision with their 
savage instincts and barbarous customs and habits ; and it can be 
understood that they submit but impatiently to, and even try to 
escape from, a state of society which seems to them to be restrictive 
of their licence and excesses. It frequently happens in Africa that an 
exodus of natives takes place from one territory to another, in the 
hope of finding beyond the frontier a Government less well 
established or less strong, and of thus freeing themselves from all 
obligations and restraints. Natives of the State may quite well, under 
the influence of considerations of this kind, have crossed into 
neighbouring territories, although no kind of emigration on a large 
scale, such as is referred to in the English note, has ever been 
reported by the Commandants of the frontier provinces. On the 
contrary, it is a fact that natives in the Upper Nile region who had 
settled in British territory have returned to the left bank in 
consequence of the imposition of new taxes by the English 
authorities. Besides, if it is these territories which are alluded to, the 
information contained in the note would seem to be in contradiction 
with other particulars furnished, for instance, by Sir Harry Johnston. 


"This much I can speak of with certainty and emphasis, that from the 
British frontier near Fort George to the limit of my journeys into the 


Mbuba country of the Congo Free State, up and down the Semliki, 
the natives appear to be prosperous and happy. .'. The extent to 
which they were building their villages and cultivating their 
plantations within the precincts of Fort Mbeni showed that they had 
no fear of the Belgians." 


Major H. H. Gibbons, who was for several months on the Upper 
Wile, writes 


" Having had occasion to know many officers, and to visit their 
stations in the Congo State, I am convinced that their behaviour has 
been much misunderstood by the press. I have quoted as a proof’ my 
experience, which is at variance with an article recently published in 
the English press, in which they are accused of great cruelties." 


The declaration of last June, of which a copy is inclosed, has disposed 
of the criticisms directed against the public forces of the State, by 
pointing out that recruitment for them is regulated by law, and that it 
is only one man in every 10,000 who is affected. To say that " the 
method of obtaining men. for military service is often but little 
different from that formerly employed to obtain slaves " is to 
misunderstand the carefully drawn regulations which have, on the 
contrary, been issued to check abuses. Levies take place in each 
district ; the district Commissioners settle the mode of conscription 
in agreement with the native Chiefs. Voluntary enlistment, and 
numerous re-enlistments, easily fill up the ranks, which only reach, all 
told, the moderate total of 15,000 men. 


Those who allege, as the note says, that " the men composing the 
armed force of the State were in many cases recruited from the most 
watlike and savage tribes " must be unaware that the public forces are 
recruited from every province, and from the whole population. It is 
inconceivable that the authorities of a State, with due regard to its 
interests, should form an army out of undisciplined and savage 
elements, and instances are to be found— such as- the excesses said 
to have been perpetrated by irregular levies in Uganda, and the 
revolts which formerly occurred in the Congo — which, on the 
contrary, render it necessary that special care should be exercised in 
raising armed forces. The European establishment, consisting of 


Belgian, Italian, Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish officers, maintains 
strict discipline, and it would be vain to seek the actual facts alluded 
to in the assertion that the soldiers " not infrequently terrorized over 
their own officers." Such an assertion is as unfounded as the one " 
that compulsion is often exercised by irresponsible native soldiers, 
uncontrolled by an European officer." For a long time past the 
authorities have been alive to the danger arising from the existence of 
stations of negro soldiers, who inevitably abuse their authority, as 
recognized in the Report of Sir D. Chalmers on the insurrection in 
Sierra Leone. In the Congo such stations have been gradually 
abolished. 


Those who do not refuse to accept patent facts will recognize that of 
the reproaches levied at the State, the most unjust is the statement " 
that no attempt at any administration of the natives is made, and that 
the officers of the Government do not apparently concern 
themselves with such work." 


It is astonishing to come across such an assertion in a despatch from 
a Government, one of whose members, Lord Cranborne, Under- 
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, stated on the 20th May last : — 


"There was no doubt that the administration of the Congo 
Government had been marked by a very high degree of a certain kind 
of administrative development. There were railways, there were 
steamers upon the river, hospitals had been established, and all the 
machinery of elaborate judicial and police systems had been set up." 


Another member of the House of Commons acknowledged — 


"That the Congo State had done good work in excluding alcoholic 
liquor from the greater part of their domain ; that they had 
established a certain number of hospitals, had diminished small-pox 
by means of vaccination, and had suppressed the Arab Slave Trade." 


However limited these admissions, still they contradict the assertion 
now made that " the natives are left entirely to themselves, so far as 
any assistance in their government or in their affairs is concerned." 


Such does not seem to have been the conclusion at which Mr. 
Pickersgill, the English Consul, had arrived as long ago as 1898. 


" Has the welfare of the African," he asks, " been duly cared for in 
the Congo State?" He answers: "The State has restricted the liquor 
trade ..... it is scarcely possible to over-estimate the service which is 
being rendered by the Congo Government to its subjects in this 
matter Intertribal wars have been suppressed over a wide area, and, 
the imposition of European authority being steadily pursued, the 
boundaries of peace are constantly extending The State must be 
congratulated upon the security it has created for all who live within 
the shelter of its flag and abide by its laws and regulations. .... Credit 
is also due to the Congo Government in respect of the diminution of 
cannibalism and The yoke of the notorious Arab slave-traders has 
been broken, and traffic in human beings amongst the natives 
themselves has been diminished to a considerable degree." 


This Report also showed that the labour of the native was 
remunerated, and gave due credit to the State for its efforts to 
instruct the young natives, and to open schools. 


Since 1898 the general condition of the native has been still further 
improved. The system of carriers ("le portage a dos d'homme 3 '), the 
hardships of which, so far as the native was concerned, were specially 
pointed out by Mr. Pickersgill, has disappeared from those parts of 
the country where it was most practised, in consequence of the 
opening of railways. 


Elsewhere motor cars are used as means of transport. The " sentry," 
the station of negro soldiers which the Consul criticized, not without 
reason, no longer exists. Cattle have been introduced into every 
district. Sanitary Commissions have been instituted. Schools and 
workshops have multiplied. 


"The native," says the inclosed document,* " is better housed, better 
clad, and better fed ; he is replacing his huts by better built and 
healthier dwelling-places ; thanks to existing transport facilities, he is 
able to obtain the produce necessary to satisfy his new- wants ; 
workshops have been opened for him, where he learns handicrafts, 


such as those of the blacksmith, carpenter, mechanic, and mason ; he 
extends his plantations and, taking example by the white man, learns 
rational modes of agriculture ; he is always able to obtain medical 
assistance ; he sends his children to the State school-colonies and to 
the missionary schools." 


As stated in the House of Commons, it is only right to recognize that 
the material and moral regeneration of Central Africa cannot be the 
work of a day. The results so far obtained have been considerable, 
and these we shall try to consolidate and develop, in spite of the way 
in which an effort is being made to hamper the action of the State, 
which in the real interests of civilization should rather be promoted. 


The English note does not show that the economic system of the 
State is in opposition to the Berlin Act. It does not meet (he points of 
law and fact by means of which the State has demonstrated the 
conformity of its system of land tenure and concessions with the 
provisions of that Act. It does not explain either how or why 
freedom of trade — a term used at the Conference of Berlin in its 
usual, grammatical, and economic sense — is incomplete in the 
Congo State because there are landowners there. 


The note confuses the utilization of his property by the owner with 
trade. The native who collects on behalf of the owner does not 
become the owner of what is so collected, and naturally cannot 
dispose of it to a third party, any more than a miner can rob the 
proprietor of the produce of the mine and dispose of it himself. 
These rules are in accordance with the principles of justice and are 
explained in numerous documents, such as legal opinions and judicial 
decisions, some of which are annexed. His Majesty's Government do 
not deny that the State is justified in allotting domain lands to bond 
fide occupants, or that the native has no longer any right to the 
produce of the soil as soon as the " land is reduced into individual 
occupation." The distinction is without legal foundation. If the State 
can part with land, it is because the native is not the owner ; by what 
title could he then retain a right to the produce of property which has 
been lawfully acquired by others? Could it be contended, for instance, 
that the Low-er Congo Railway Company, or the South Cameroons 
Company, or the Italian Colonial Trading Company are, on the 


ground that they are not at present in occupation, bound to allow the 
native to plunder the territories allotted to them? As a matter of fact, 
more-over, in the Congo State the appropriation of lands worked on 
Government account or by the Concessionary Companies is an 
accomplished fact. The State and the Companies have devoted large 
sums, amounting to many millions of francs, to the development of 
the lands in question, and more especially to that of the forests. 
There can, therefore, be no doubt that throughout the territories of 
the Congo the State really and completely works its property, just as 
the Companies really and completely work their Concessions. 


The state of affairs then which actually exists, and is established in 
the Independent State, is such that there is really no need, as far as 
the State itself is concerned, to dwell longer on the theory set forth in 
the note which deals in turn with the rights of the State, with those of 
bond fide occupiers, and those of the natives. 


Still this theory calls for the attention of the Powers in view of the 
serious difficulties which would arise were it to be implicitly accepted. 


The note lays down the three following propositions . 


" The State has the right to partition the State lands among bond fide 
occupants." 


" The natives will, as the land is so divided out amongst bond fide 
occupiers, lose their right of roaming over it and collecting the 
natural fruits which it produces." 


" Until unoccupied land is reduced into individual occupation, and so 
long as the produce can only be collected by the native, the native 
should be free to dispose of that produce as he pleases." 


There is no single one of these propositions but apparently excludes 
the other two, and, as a matter of fact, such contradictions amount to 
a denial of the right to grant Concessions. 


If bond fide occupiers ever existed they have become proprietors ; 
occupation, where it can be exercised, is under all legislative codes, 


one of the methods by which property can be acquired, and in the 
Congo State titles of ownership deriving from it have been legally 
registered. If the land has never been legally occupied, it is without an 
owner, ot, tather the State is the owner: the State can allot it toa 
third party, for whom such allotment is a complete and absolute title. 
In either case it is hard to see how the fruits of the soil can be 
reserved for any but the owner on the pretext that the latter is not 
able to collect the produce of his property. 


By a curious contradiction it is observed in the note that, as a 
consequence of the allotment of lands by the State, the natives " lose 
their right of collecting the natural fruits," and, on the other hand, 
that they retain the right of disposing of these fruits " until 
unoccupied land is reduced into individual occupation." It is difficult 
to understand what is meant by a right which belongs to the natives 
or not according to the action of a third party. Either they lost their 
rights on the lands being allotted, and in that case they have lost them 
entirely and completely, or else they have retained them, and are 
entitled to retain them, although " the land is reduced into individual 
occupation." 


Again, what are we to understand by the expressions " bond fide" 
occupiers and " individual occupation ? " Who is to determine 
whether the occupier has brought his lands into a state of individual 
occupation, whether he is able to collect their produce, or whether it 
is still for the native to do so ? In any case, such a question is 
essentially one to be settled by municipal law. 


The note is, moreover, incomplete in another respect. It states that 
where the land has not yet been worked by those who have a right to 
it, the option of working should belong to the native. Rights would 
thus be given to the natives to the prejudice of the Government or of 
white concessionnaires, but the note does not explain how nor by 
whom the wrong thus caused would be repaired or made good. 
Though the system thus advocated cannot be applied in the Congo 
State, as there are no longer any unappropriated lands there, attention 
should be called to the statement in the interest of white men 
established in the conventional basin. If it is right to treat the negro 


well, it is none the less just not to despoil the white man, who, in the 
interest of all, must remain the dominant race. 


From an economic point of view, it would be very regrettable if, in 
spite of the rights regularly acquired by white men, the domain lands 
were, even temporarily, handed over to the natives. Such a course 
would involve a return to their former condition ol abandonment, 
when the natives left them unproductive, for the collection of rubber, 
the plantation of coffee, cocoa, tobacco, &c, date from the day when 
the State itself took the initiative : the export trade was insignificant 
before the impetus it received from Government enterprise. Such a 
course would furthermore certainly involve the neglect of rational 
methods of work, of planting and of replanting — measures which 
the State and the Concessionary Companies have assumed as an 
obligation with a view to securing the preservation of the natural 
riches of the country. 


Never in the Congo, so far as we know, have requests to buy natural 
produce been addressed to the rightful owners. Up to now the only 
attempts made have been to buy the produce which has been stolen, 
and the State, as was its duty, has had those guilty of these unlawful 
attempts prosecuted. 


It is not true, as has been asserted, that the policy of the State has 
killed trade ; it has, on the contrary, created the materials which trade 
deals in and keeps up the supply ; it is thanks to the State that, on the 
Antwerp market — and soon even in the Congo where the possibility 
of establishing trade depots is being considered — 5,000 tons of 
rubber collected in the Congo can be annually put on sale to all and 
sundry without privilege or monopoly, while formerly, in 1887, for 
instance, the rubber export amounted to hardly 30 tons. It is the State 
which, after having created, at its own expense, the material of, trade, 
carefully preserves the source of it by means of planting and 
replanting. 


It must not be forgotten either that the Congo State has been obliged 
to tely on its own resources. It was forced to utilize its domain in the 

public interest. All the receipts of the domain go into the Treasury, as 
also the dividends of the shares which the State holds in exchange for 


Concessions granted. It has only been by fully utilizing its domain 
lands, and pledging the greater part of their revenues, that it has been 
able to raise loans, and encourage the construction of railways by 
guarantees of interest, thus realizing one of the means most 
advocated by the Brussels Conference for promoting civilization in 
Central Africa. Nor has it hesitated to mortgage its domain lands with 


this object. 


The Berlin Act is not opposed to such a course, for it never 
proscribed the rights of property as there is now an ex post facto 
attempt to make out, an attempt tending, consciously or not, to the 
ruin of the whole conventional basin of the Congo. 


It will not escape the notice of the Powers that the English note, by 
suggesting a reference to the Court at The Hague, tends to bring into 
consideration as cases for arbitration questions of sovereignty and 
internal administration as questions for arbitra-tion which, according 
to prevailing doctrines, are excluded from arbitral decisions. As far as 
the present; case is concerned, it must be assumed that the suggestion 
of referring the matter to the Court at The Hague has a general 
meaning, if it is true that, in the opinion of the English Chambers of 
Commerce, " the principles and practice introduced into the 
administration of the affairs of the French Congo, the Congo Free 
State, and other areas in the conventional basin of the Congo being 
[sic] in direct opposition to the Articles of the Act of Berlin, 1885." 
The Government of the Congo State have never ceased advocating 
arbitration as a mode of settling questions which are of an 
international nature, and can thus be suitably treated, as, for instance, 
the divergencies of opinion which have arisen in connexion with the 
lease of the territories of the Bahr-el-Ghazal. 


The Government of the Congo State, after careful examination of the 
English note, remain convinced that, in view of its vagueness, and the 
complete lack of evidence, which is implicitly admitted, there is no 
tribunal in the world, supposing there were one possessing 
competent jurisdiction, which could, far from pronouncing a 
condemna-tion, take any decision other than to refuse action on mere 
supposition. 


If the Congo State is attacked, England may admit that she, more 
than any other nation, has been the object of attacks and accusations 
of every kind, and the list would be long of the campaigns which 
have at various times, and even quite recently, been directed against 
her colonial administration. She has certainly not escaped criticism in 
regard to her numerous and bloody wars against native populations, 
nor the reproach of oppressing natives and invading their liberty. Has 
she not been blamed in regard to the long insurrections in Sierra 
Leone ; to the disturbed state of Nigeria, where quite recently, 
according to the English newspapers, military measures of repression 
cost, on one single occasion, the lives of 700 natives, of most of their 
Chiefs, and of the Sultan ; acid to the conflict in Somaliland. which is 
being carried on at the cost of many lives, -without, however, exciting 
expressions of regret in the House of Commons, except on the score 
of the heavy expense ? 


Seeing that these attacks have left England indifferent, it is somewhat 
surprising to find her now attaching such importance to those made 
on the Congo State. 

There is, however, reason to think that the natives of the Congo State 
prefer the Government of a small and pacific nation, whose aims 
remain as peaceful as its creation which was founded on Treaties 


concluded with the natives. 


(Signed) CHR DE CUVELIEE. Brussels, September 17, 1903. 


Annexes.* 


I. " Bulletin Officiel de I'Btat Independant du Congo," Jum 
1903. ° 


II. Judgments delivered by the Tribunals of Erench Congo. 


III. Opinions of Messrs. Yan Maldeghem and de Paepe, Van 
Berchem, Barboux, and Nys. 


Translations of Extracts from Annex L 
Page 142. 


In conformity with Articles II and XIII of the Berlin Act, it (the 
Congo State) has assured to all flags, without distinction of 
nationality, free access to all its interior waters and full and entire 
freedom of navigation. The railway, which has been constructed to 
obviate the innavigability of the lower river, is open to the traffic of 
all nations in conformity with Article XVI, 


* Copies have been sent to the Library of each House of Parliament, 


In conformity with Article III, there is no differential treatment either 
of ships or goods, and no tax is levied on foreigners which is not 
equally borne by nationals. % In conformity with Article IV, no 
transit due has been imposed. 


In conformity with Article VI, freedom of conscience and the free 
exercise of worship are guaranteed to natives, to foreigners, and to 
the missions of all creeds. 


In conformity with Article VII, the State has adhered to the 
Convention of the Universal Postal Union. 


Availing itself of the power conferred by Article X, the Congo State 
has declared itself perpetually neutral, and in no circumstance has 
failed in the duties imposed by neutrality. 


In conformity with Article XII, it has endeavoured, in case of any 
international difference, to have recourse to mediation and 
arbitration, and has never declined to accept such procedure. 


In conformity with the Declaration of the 2nd July, 1890, the import 
and export duties levied do not exceed the limits fixed by the 
Agreements of the 8th April, 1892, and the 10th March, 1902, 
between the State, France and Portugal. 


Article I of the Act of Berlin lays down that "the trade of all nations 
shall enjoy complete freedom in the Conventional basin of the 
Congo," and, by Article V, "no monopoly or favour of any kind in 
matters of trade" shall be granted there. These provisions, like the 
rest, have been respected by the Congo State in the letter and in the 
spirit. 


Page 144. 


Freedom of trade is complete in the Congo, and is restricted neither 
by monopoly nor privilege. Everyone is free to sell or buy every sort 
of produce in which it is lawful to trade. The law protects this 
freedom by forbiddirg any interference with the freedom of business 
transactions ; it punishes "any one who has employed violence or 
threats with a view to compel the natives, whether on the roads in the 
interior, or in the markets, to part with their goods to particular 
persons or at particular prices ;"it punishes " those who, by violence, 
abuse, or threats, shall, have interfered with the freedom of trade, 
with aview either to stop trade caravans on the public roads or to 
obstruct the freedom of traffic whether by land or water."! 


It is asserted that the principle of the freedom of trade is infringed by 
the appropriation by the State of vacant and ownerless lands within 
its boundaries. When by the Decree of the 1st July, 1885, the State 
declared that "no one has the right to occupy vacant lands without a 
title; vacant lands are to be considered as belonging to the State," t it 
did so in reliance on a legal principle which is universally admitted, its 
action in this matter was not, as has been said, the first step in a 
deliberate policy of' exclusiveness. That principle was inscribed in the 
Codes of all civilized countries; it has been sanctioned by all Colonial 
legislative systems. 


Page 152. 


If it were true that, by declaring all ownerless lands to be 
Government property, the Congo State had expropriated the natives, 
all these various legislative systems could be attacked on the same 
ground. It is generally admitted that the native has no real title to the 
ownership of the vast stretches of country which from time 


immemorial be has allowed to lie fallow, or to the forests which he 
has never turned to profit. But the law of the Congo State is careful 
to maintain the natives in the enjoyment of the lands they occupy 
and, as a nlatter of fact, not only are they not disturbed in this 
enjoyment, hut they are actually extending the lands they cultivate 
and their plantations as' their needs grow. The State has been at 
much pains to prevent the natives from being, robbed. 


"No one has the right to dispossess natives of the lands which they 
occupy (Ordinance of the 1st July, 1885, Article 2). 


"The lands occupied by the native, population under the authority of 
their Chiefs, shall continue to be governed by the local customs and 
usages (Decree of the 14th September, 1886, Article 2). 


" All Acts or Agreements which would tend to drive the natives from 
the territories they occupy, or to deprive them directly or indirectly of 
their liberty or means of livelihood, are prohibited (Decree of the 
14th September, 1886, Article 2). 


* Penal Code, Art. 56 (Decree of the 26th May, 1888, Bulletin 
Officiel, 1897, p. 31). t Penal Code, Art. 57 (fdem, p. 31). t 
Bulletin Officiel, 1885, p. 31. 


"In cases where the lands which form the subject of application are 
occupied in part by natives, the Governor-General, or his Delegate, 
shall intervene in order, if possible, to effect an arrangement with 
them, securing to the applicant the lands so occupied either by 
cession or by lease, but the State is not to be put to any expense in 
the matter (Decree of the 9th April, 1893, Article 5). 


"When native villages are inclosed in lands which have either been 
disposed of or leased, the natives may, so long as the land has not 
been officially measured, take into cultivation, without the consent of 
either the owner or the lessor, the vacant lands surrounding their 
villages (Decree of the 9th April, 1893, Article 6). 


"The members of the Land Commission shall examine with special 
cate the question whether the lands applied for ought not to be 


reserved either for the public use or with a view to allow of the 
extension of cultivation by the natives (Decree of the 2nd February, 
1893, Article 2)." 


Page 156. 


If it is inexact to say that the natives have been robbed of 
immemorial rights, it is equally so to assert that the policy of the State 
has aimed at the exclusion of private trading in order to assure 
greater advantages for its own commercial enterprises. 


Such a statement can only be the result of a misapprehension of the 
various phases through which the Congo trade has passed since 1885. 
At that time private enterprise was centred in the Lower Congo only. 
The Government, far from wishing to close the Upper Congo, 
declared its access free to all. The Decree of the 30th April, 1887, led, 
on the contrary, to various commercial firms establishing themselves 
above Stanley Pool, owing to the facilities it afforded for settling on 
the domain lands. 


Article 6 of that Decree provided ; 


"Non-natives who desire to found commercial or agricultural 
establishments in the districts above Stanley Pool, or in others to be 
eventually designated by the Governor- General of the Congo, shall 
be at liberty to take possession with this view of an area, the 
maximum size of which shall be fixed by the Governor- General ; 
provided that they fulfil such conditions as he shall lay down, they 
shall enjoy a preferential right to the eventual acquisition of property 
in such lands at a price which shall be fixed by him beforehand." 


And Article 7 added : 


"The non-natives who, in the same regions, shall desire to occupy 
lands, of which the area shall exceed the maximum referred to in the 
preceding Article, may occupy them provisionally on such conditions 
as the Governor-General shall determine. He shall further decide 
whether the preferential right alluded to in the preceding Article shall 
be given to them in regard to this larger extent of land."* 


"With a view to assist commercial enterprise in the regions of the 
interior, the Government even exempted from export duty — the 
only customs duties which they could at that time levy- — all native 
produce coming from the territories above Stanley Pool. 


"Prom the 1st January, 1888," so ran Article 1 of the Ordinance of 
the 19th October, 1897, "and till further orders, native produce 
coming from the State territories on the left bank of Stanley Pool and 
above that lake shall be exempted from export duty." 


Later, by the Decree of the 17th October, 1889,t the Government 
announced that applications might be presented for concessions to 
work rubber and other vegetable .produce in the State 'forests of the 
Upper Congo where such produce was not already worked by the 
native population. 


By the Decree of the 9th July, 1890, the collection of ivory within the 
State domains was entirely given up to private persons throughout 
such parts of the Congo as were at that time visited by the steamers. 


These Regulations were applicable to all foreign enterprise, without 
distinction of nationality ; they show that there was no such policy of 
ostracism in regard to private enterprise such as is now attributed to 
the State. 


It has not been the fault of the Government that nationals of all 
countries have not profited by this liberal system. They continued, 
however, to confine themselves, with few exceptions, to the Lower 
Congo. The Companies which decided to extend their operations in 
the central districts of the Congo found every facility for the 
establishment of agencies, and acquired the favourable position 
which they now enjoy. 


* Bulletin Offlciel, 1887. p. 72, t Bulletin Offlciel. 1888, p. 3. + 
Bulletin Offlciel, 1889, p. 2 18. 


The State can hardly be blamed because, in face of the almost 
universal inaction on the part of private individuals, it endeavoured to 
turn its territories to account by working its domain lands, either on 


its own account or through others. It was, however, the only way to 
secure the funds necessary for the Budget, the charges in which 
steadily increased with the extension of the public service, and to give 
the country the benefit of an economic system by imposing upon the 
concessionary Companies the obligation to undertake works of 
public utility. 


The Government, further, were careful not to abandon a policy of 
moderation in the matter. When by the Decree of the 30th October, 
1892, they defined regions reserved for working by the domain 
(those, that is to say, in which it had been ascertained, after inquiry, 
that the natives had never engaged in the collection of rubber), they 
still left vast zones at the disposal of the public, and allowed to 
private persons the exclusive right to work the rubber on the 
Government properties there. As a matter of fact, the zones in 
question comprised more than a quarter of the vacant State lands, 
apart from the whole country below Stanley Pool. Nevertheless, the 
Companies persisted for some yeats more in not moving towards 
these regions ; it has only been since 1897 that there have been any 
signs of general activity. It was then that the numerous factories 
which are still co be found there were started in the Kassai, Ikelemba, 
and Lulonga districts, and on the banks of the Congo. But it is to be 
noted that with one exception none but Belgian Companies decided 
to put their capital into those enterprises, and to take the consequent 
risks. Foreigners have held aloof, in spite of the fact that they were at 
perfect liberty to establish themselves in these regions ; even the 
firms which had been long established in the Lower Congo, and 
especially the English bouses, did not consider the moment 
favourable for establishing branches in the Upper Congo. The above 
remark is generally applicable, in so far that, also in the territories for 
which Concessions have been given, not one of the concessionary 
Companies has found any foreign interests previously existing ; 
indeed, certain foreigners who were interested in one of the most 
important of them, the Anglo-Belgian India-Rubber and Exploration 
Company, which was founded by an English group, have parted with 
their interests. 


The commercial field open to private persons in the Congo never has 
been and is not limited ; trade is free, so far as it is legitimate, 


throughout the country, and in certain regions the State, far from 
organizing any excessive working of its domain lands, has even 
renounced the exercise of its rights of property. To give one instance 
only the Dutch Company, the value of whose exports was 730,000 
fr. in 1887, exported in 1901 goods to the value of more than 
3,000,000 fr. 


Page 162. 


The work of organization has since been going on over the whole 
country by the more and mote effective occupation of the territory ; 
posts and stations have been multiplied, and now number 215 ; the 
work of the administrative, judicial, and sanitary authorities has 
expanded ; transport facilities have been introduced ; two lines of 
railways have been laid in the Lower Congo, and there are others 
either being constructed or proposed in the Upper Congo; seventy- 
nine steamers and boats have been put on the river and its affluents; 
1,500 kilom. of telegraph and telephone lines have been laid; carriage 
roads have been built, on which the use of automobiles will put an 
end to the system of carriers (" portage a dos d'homme "); vaccine 
institutes have been established with a view to putting a stop, through 
the increased use of lymph, to the ravages of small-pox ; water- 
works have been built in important centres, such as Boma and Matadi 
; hospitals for blacks and whites have been founded at different 
posts, as also Red Cross stations and a bacteriological institute ; 
importation of spirituous liquors and trade in them has been 
prohibited almost everywhere, while the importation of alcoholic 
drinks made with absinthe, as also trade in them, have been 
forbidden everywhere ; the trade in improved fire-arms and 
ammunition for them has been absolutely forbidden ; cattle have 
been introduced at all the stations, and model farms have been 
established ; Sanitary Commissions have been instituted whose duty it 
is to watch over the requirements of the elements of public health. 


This general development is necessarily accompanied by an 
improvement of the conditions in which the native lives, wherever he 
comes into contact with the European element. Materially, he is 
better housed, better clad, and better fed; he is replacing his huts by 
better built and healthier dwelling-places ; thanks to existing transport 


facilities, he is able to obtain the produce necessary to satisfy his new 
wants ; workshops have been opened for him, where he learns 
handicrafts, such as those of the blacksmith, carpenter, mechanic, 
and mason; he extends his plantations, and, taking example by the 
white man, learns rational modes of agriculture ; he is always able to 
obtain medical assistance ; he sends his children to the State school- 
colonies and to the missionary schools. Steps have been taken to 
safeguard the individual liberty of the blacks, and especially to 
prevent labour contracts between blacks and non-natives 
degenerating into disguised slavery. It is on this point that the Decree 
of the 5th November, 1888, enters into the most minute details 
concerning the length of the engagement, the form of the contract, 
and the payment of wages. Recent legislation in French Congo, 
which has very properly been praised by the English organs, bas been 
dictated by the like solicitude for the natives. 


The native is free to seek by work the remuneration which 
contributes to the increase of his well-being. One of the objects, 
indeed, of the general policy of the State is to aim at the regeneration 
of the race by impressing them with the high idea of the necessity of 
work. It is intelligible that Governments, conscious of their moral 
responsibility, should not advocate the right of the inferior races to 
be idle, which would entail the continuance of a social system 
opposed to civilization. The Congo State aims at carrying out its 
educational mission by requiring the native to contribute, by means 
of a tax in kind, for which, however, payment is made to him, to the 
development of the State forests; the amount of wich payments was, 
in the Budget for 1903, nearly 3,000,000 fr. The legality’ of such a 
system of developing the State property rests not only on the 
universal principle which attributes to the State the possession of 
ownerless lands, but also on the cession which the local Chiefs have 
made to the State, by peaceful methods and Treaties, of such political 
and land rights as they may have possessed; and on the fact that it is 
the State itself which bas revealed to the natives the existence of 
those natural riches of which they were ignorant by showing them 
how to work ; it is the State, too, which has bound itself, equally with 
private persons, to plant and replant, and thus to insure the 
preservation and perpetuity of those natural relies which the 


carelessness of some and the lust of gain of others could not have 
failed to destroy. 


Page 165. 


The system which the State has followed, while forwarding the 
economical development of the country, has at the same time caused 
a considerable commercial movement inasmuch as the exports now 
amount to a value of .50,000,000, and 5,000 tons of rubber from the 
Congo forests are sold every year at Antwerp to the highest bidder. 


Whatever may have been said this prosperity has not been attained to 
the detriment of the native. It has been asserted that the native 
populations must of necessit be badly treated because they are 
subjected on the one hand to military service, an on the other to the 
payment of certain taxes. 


Military service is no more slavery in the Congo than anywhere else 
where the system of conscription is in force. The manner in which 
the public forces are recruited and organized has formed the subject 
of the most minute legislative provisions, with a view to the 
avoidance of abuses. As a matter of fact military service is not a 
heavy burden to the population, from whom it only takes one man in 
10,000. To show the errors which have been believed in regard to the 
public forces it is necessary once more to point out that they are 
composed entirely of regular troops, and there are not irregular levies 
" composed of undisciplined and barbarous elements. Care has been 
taken gradually to get rid of posts of black soldiers, and at the present 
moment every military post is commanded by a white officer. The 
increase in the number of officials has allowed of giving European 
officers to all detachments of these forces. 


In regard to contributions in kind which are levied on the native by 
the authorities, such taxes are as legitimate as any other. They do not 
impose on the native burdens of a different or heavier kind than the 
forms of impost enforced in the neighbouring Colonies, such as the 
but tax. The native thus bears his share of the public burden as a 
return for the protection afforded him by the State, and this share is a 


light one since on an average it means for the native no more than 
forty hours of work a- month. 


It is unfortunately true that acts of violence have been committed 
against the natives in the Congo, as everywhere else in Africa: the 
Congo State has never sought either to deny or to conceal them. The 
detractors of the State show themselves to be prejudiced when they 
quote these acts as the necessary consequence of a bad system of 
administration, or when they assert that they are tolerated by the 
higher authorities. 


Whenever any European official has been guilty of such acts he has 
been punished by the Courts, and a certain number of Europeans are 
at this moment in the prisons of the State expiating their offences 
against the penal laws which protect the life and person of the native. 
If the enormous extent of the Congo State is taken into account, 
such cases are the exception, as is obvious from the fact that recent 
publications attacking the Congo State have been obliged, in support 
of their indictment, to take up incidents nearly ten years old, and 
even to have recourse, amongst others, to the testimony of a 
commercial agent actually condemned for his excesses against the 
blacks. It is worthy of remark that the Catholic missionaries have 
never called attention to this general system of cruelty which is 
imputed to the State, and if judicial statistics demonstrate the stern 
measutes that have been taken by the Criminal Courts, it does not 
follow that there is more crime in the Congo than in other Central 
African Colonies. 


No. 3. (actual report by roger casement) 


Mr. Casement to the Marquess of Lansdowne.—( Received 
December 12.) 


My Lord, London, December 11, 1903. 


I HAVE the honour to submit my Report on my recent journey on 
the Upper Congo. 


I left Matadi on the 5th June, and arriving at Leopoldville on the 6th, 
remained in the neighbourhood of Stanley Pool until the 2nd July, 
when I set out for the Upper Congo. My return to Leopoldville was 
on the 15th September, so that the period spent in the Upper River 
was one of only two and a-half months, during which time I visited 
several points on the Congo River itself, up to the junction of the 
Lulongo River, ascended that river and its principal feeder, the 
Lopori, as far as Bongandanga. and went round Lake Mantumba. 


Although my visit was of such brief duration, and the points touched 
at nowhere lay far off the beaten tracks of communication, the region 
visited was one of the most central in the Congo State, and the 
district in which most of my time was spent, that of the Equator, is 
probably one of the most productive. Moreover, I was enabled, by 
visiting this district, to contrast its present day state with the 
condition in which I had known it some sixteen years ago. Then 
(in 1887) I had visited most of the places I now revisited, and I was 
thus able to institute a comparison between a state of affairs I had 
myself seen when the natives lived their own savage lives in anarchic 
and disorderly communities, uncontrolled by Europeans, and that 
created by more than a decade of very energetic European 
intervention. That very much of this intervention has been called for 
no one who formerly knew the Upper Congo could doubt, and there 
arc to-day widespread proofs of the great energy displayed by Belgian 
officials in introducing their methods of rule over one of the most 
savage regions of Africa. 


Admirably built and admirably kept stations greet the traveller at 
many points; a fleet of river steamers, numbering, I believe, forty- 
eight, the property of the Congo Government, navigate the main 
river and its principal affluents at fixed intervals. Regular means of 
communication ate thus afforded to some of the most inaccessible 
parts of Central Africa. 


A railway, excellently constructed in view of the difficulties to be 
encountered, now connects the ocean ports with Stanley Pool, over a 
tract of difficult country, which formerly offered to the weary 
traveller on foot many obstacles to be overcome and many days of 
great bodily fatigue. To-day the railway works most efficiently, and I 


noticed many improvements, both in the permanent way and in the 
general management, since the date of my last visit to Stanley Pool in 
January 1901. The cataract region, through which the railway passes, 
is a generally unproductive and even sterile tract of some 220 miles in 
breadth. This region is, I believe, the home, or birthplace, of the 
sleeping sickness — a terrible disease, which is, all too rapidly, eating 
its way into the heart of Africa, and has even traversed the entire 
continent to well-nigh the shores of the Indian Ocean. The 
population of the Lower Congo has been gradually reduced by the 
unchecked ravages of this, as yet, undiagnosed and incurable disease, 
and as one cause of the seemingly wholesale diminution of human 
life which I everywhere observed in the regions revisited, a 
prominent place must be assigned to this malady. The natives 
certainly attribute their alarming death-rate to this as one of the 
inducing causes, although they attribute, and I think principally, their 
rapid decrease in numbers to other causes as well. Perhaps the most 
striking change observed during my journey into the interior was the 
great reduction observable everywhere in native life. Communities I 
had formerly known as large and flourishing centres of population 
are to-day entirely gone, or now exist in such diminished numbers as 
to no longer recognizable. The southern shores of Stanley Pool had 
formerly a population of fully 5,000 Batekes, distributed through the 
three towns of Negaliema's ( Leopoldville), Kinchasa, and Ndolo, 
lying within a few miles of each other. These people, some twelve 
years ago, decided to abandon their homes, and in one night the great 
majority of them crossed over into the French territory on the north 
shores of Stanley Pool. Where formerly had stretched these populous 
native African villages, I saw to-day only a few scattered European 
houses, belonging either to Government officials or local traders. In 
Leopoldville to-day there are not, I should estimate, 100 of the 
original natives or their descendants now residing. At Kinchasa a few 
more more may be found dwelling around one of the European 
trading dep6ts, while at Ndolo none remain, and there is nothing 
there but a station of the Congo Railway Company and a 
Government post. These Bateke people were not, perhaps, 
particularly desirable subjects for an energetic Administration, which 
desired, above all things, progress and speedy results. They were 
themselves interlopers from the northern shores of the Congo River, 
and derived a very profitable existence as trading middlemen, 


exploiting the less sophisticated population among whom they had 
established themselves. Their loss to the southern shores of Stanley 
Pool is none the less to be deplored, I think, for they formed, at any 
rate, a connecting link between an incoming European commercial 
element and the background of would-be native suppliers. 


Leopoldville is sometimes spoken of as a Congo town, but it cannot 
rightly be so termed. Apart from the Government station, which, in 
most respects, is very well planned, there is nothing at all resembling 
a town — barrack would be the correct term. The Government 
station of- Leopoldville numbers, I was informed by its Chief, some 
130 Europeans, and probably 3,000 native Government workmen, 
who all dwell in well ordered lines of either very well-built European 
houses, or, for the native staff, mud-built huts. Broad paths, which 
may be termed streets, connect the various parts of this Government 
Settlement, and an elementary effort at lighting by electricity has 
already evolved three lights in front of the house of the Commissaire- 
General. Out-side the Government staff, the general community, or 
public of Leopoldville, numbers less than one dozen Europeans, and 
possibly not more than 200 native dependents of their households or 
trading stores. This general public consists of two missionary 
establishments, numbering in all 4 Europeans; a railway station with, 
I think, 1 European ; 4 trading establishments — 1 Portuguese, 1 
Belgian, 1 English, and 1 German — numbering 7 Europeans, with, 
perhaps, 80 or 100 native dependents; 2 British West African petty 
traders, and a couple of Loango tailor boys, who make clothes for the 
general community. This, I think, comprises almost all those not 
immediately dependent upon the Government. 


These shops and traders do scarcely any business in native produce, 
of which there may be said to be none in the district, but rely upon a 
cash trade in Congolese currency, carried on with the large staff of 
Government employes, both European and native. Were this cash 
dealing to cease, the four European shops would be forced to put up 
their shutters. During the period of my stay at Leopoldville it did 
actually cease, and, for reasons which were not known publicly, the 
large native staff of Congo Government workmen, instead of 
receiving a part of their monthly wages in cash to spend locally — as 
also those being paid off on the expiry of their contracts— were 


remunerated by the Government in barter goods, which were issued 
from a Government store. This method of payment did not satisfy 
either the native Government employes or the local traders, and I 
heard many complaints on this score. The traders complained, some 
of them to myself, that as they had no other form of trading open to 
them, save this with the Government staff against cash, for the 
Government to itself now pay these men in goods was to end, at a 
blow, all trade dealings in the district. The native workmen 
complained, too, that they were paid in cloth which often they did 
not want in their own homes, and in order to have the wherewithal to 
purchase what they wanted, a practice at once arose amongst these 
men to sell for cash, at a loss to themselves, the cloth they had been 
forced to receive in payment from the Government store. The 
wotkmen lost- on this transaction, and so did the traders. Pieces of 
cloth which were charged by the Government at 10 fr. each in- 
paying off the workmen, these men would readily part with for 7 fr., 
and even for 6 fr. in cash. I myself, one day in June, bought for 7 fr. 
a-piece, from two just-discharged Government workmen, two pieces 
of coth which had been charged against them at 10 fr. each. These 
men wished to buy salt at one of the local stores, and to obtain the 
means of doing so, they readily sacrificed 3 fr. in each 10 fr. of their 
pay. The traders, too, complained that by this extensive sale of cotton 
goods at reduced rates by the Government employe's, their own sales 
of cloth at current prices were rendered well nigh impossible 
throughout the district. 


The 3,000 Government workpeople at Leopoldville are drawn from 
neatly every part of the Congo State. Some, those from the cataract 
district especially, go Voluntarily seeking employment, but many, and 
I believe a vast majority, are men, or lads, brought from districts of 
the Upper Congo, and who serve the authorities not primarily at their 
own seeking. On the 16th June last, five Government workpeople 
brought me their contracts of engagement with a request that I might 
tell them how longa period they still had to serve. They were all 
Upper Congo men, and had already nearly completed the full term of 
their engagement. The contracts, in each case, appeared as having 
been signed and drawn up at Boma on behalf of the Governor- 
General of the Congo. State, and were, in each case, for a term of 
seven years. The men informed me that they had never been to 


Boma, and that the whole of their period of service hart been spent 
either at Leopoldville or on the Upper Congo. In three of these cases 
I observed that an alteration had been made in the period of service, 
in the following terms : 


" Je reduis de sept a cing ans le terme de service du" 


This entry was signed by the acting State Inspector of the district. It 
seemingly had not been observed, for it was struck out by his 
successor, and, as a matter of fact, the full period of seven years was, 
in each case, within a few months of completion. 


On the whole the Government workmen at Leopoldville struck me 
as being well cared for, and they were certainly none of them idle. 
The chief difficulty in dealing with so large a staff arises from the 
want of a sufficiency of food supply in the surrounding country. The 
staple food of the entire Upper Congo is a preparation of the root of 
"the cassava plant, steeped and boiled, and made up into loaves or 
puddings. of varying wieight. The natives of the districts around 
Leopoldville are forced to provide a fixed quantity each week of this 
form of food, which is levied by requisitions on all the surrounding 
villages. The European Government staff is also- mainly dependent 
upon food supplies obtained from the natives of the neighbourhood 
in a similar manner. This, however necessary, is not a welcome task 
to the native suppliers who complain that their numbers are yearly 
decreasing, while the demands- made upon them remain fixed, or 
tend even to increase. 


The Government station at Leopoldville and its extensive staff, exist 
almost solely in connection with the running of Government 
steamers upon the Upper Congo. 


A hospital for Europeans and an establishment designed as a native 
hospital are- in charge of a European doctor. Another doctor also 
resides in the Government station whose bacteriological studies 
are unremitting and worthy of much praise. 


The native hospital — not, I am given to understand, through the 
fault of the local medical staff — is, however, an unseemly place. 


When I visited the three mud huts- which serve this purpose, all of 
them dilapidated, and two with the thatched roofs almost gone, I 
found seventeen sleeping sickness patients, male and female, lying 
about in the utmost dirt. Most of them were lying on the bare ground 
— several out on the pathway in front of the houses, and one, a 
woman, had fallen into the fire just prior to my arrival (while in the 
final, insensible stage of the disease), and had burned herself very 
badly. She had since been well bandaged, but was still lying out on 
the ground with her head almost in the fire, and while I sought to 
speak to her, in turning, she upset a pot of scalding water over her 
shoulder. All of the seventeen persons I saw were near their end, and 
on my second visit, two days later, the 19th June, I found one of 
them lying dead out in the open. 


In somewhat striking contrast to the neglected state of these people, I 
found, within a couple of hundred yards of them, the Government 
workshop for repairing and fitting the steamers. Here all was 
brightness, care, order, and activity, and it was impossible not to 
admire and commend the industry which had created and main- 
tained in constant working order this useful establishment. In 
conjunction with a local missionary, some effort was made during my 
stay at Leopoldville, to obtain an amelioration of the condition of the 
sleeping-sickness people in the native hospital, but it was stated, in 
answer to my friend's representations, that nothing could be done in 
the way of building a proper hospital until plans now under 
consideration had been matured elsewhere. The structures i had 
visited, which the local , medical staff greatly deplored, had endured 
for several years as the only form of hospital accommodation 
provided for the numerous native staff of the district. 


The Government stores at Lecpoldville are large and well built, and 
contain not only the goods the Government itself sends up river in 
its fleet of steamers, but also the goods of the various Concession 
Companies. As a rule, the produce brought down river by the 
Government steamers is transhipped direct into the railway trucks 
which, run alongside the wharf, and is carried thence by train to 
Matadi for shipment to Europe. The various Companies carrying on 
operations on the Upper Congo, and who hold Concessions from the 
Congo Government, ate bound, I was told, by Conventions to 


abstain from carrying, save within the limits of their Concessions, 
either goods or passengers. This interdiction extends to their own 
merchandise and to their own agents. Should they carry, by reason of 
imperative need, outside these limits any. of their own goods or their 
own'people, they are bound to pay to the Congo Government either 
the freight or passage money according to the Government tariff, just 
as though the goods or passengers had been conveyed on one of the 
Government vessels. The tariff upon goods and passengers carried 
along the interior waterways is a fairly high one, not perhaps 
excessive under the circumstances, but still one that, by reason of this 
virtual monopoly, can produce a yearly revenue which must go far 
towards maintaining the Government flotilla. By the estimates for 
1902, published in the " Bulletin Officiel " of January this year, the 
transport service is credited with a production of 3,100,000 fr. of 
public revenue for 1902, while the expenditure for the same year is 
put at 2,023,376 fr. That this restriction of public conveyance to 
Government vessels alone is not altogether a public gain my own 
experience demonstrated. I bad wished to leave Stanley Pool for the 
Upper Congo at an early date after in my arrtval in Leopoldville, but 
as the Government vessels were mostly crowded, I could not 
proceed with any comfort by one of these. 


The steam-ship " Plandre," one of the largest of these vessels, which 
left Leopoldville for Stanley Falls on the 22nd June, and by which I 
had, at first, intended to proceed, quitted port with more than twenty 
European passengers over her complement, all of whom, I was 
informed, would have to sleep on deck. I accordingly was forced to 
seek other means of travelling, and through the kindness of the 
"Director of one of the large commercial Companies (the " Societe 
Anonyme Belge du Haut- Congo) I found excellent accommodation, 
as a guest, on one of his steamers. Although thus an invited guest and 
not paying any passage money, special permission had to be sought 
from the Congo Government before this act of courtesy could be 
shown me, and i saw the telegram from the local authority, 
authorizing my conveyance to Chumbitri. 


This commercial Company has three other steamers, hut the 
interdiction referred to applies to the entire flotilla of trading vessels 
of Congolese nationality on the Upper River. Bespite the fact that 


these vessels are not allowed to earn freight or passage, they are all, 
for their tonnage, heavily taxed, while the Government vessels, which 
earn considerable sums on transport of general goods and 
passengers, pay no taxes. The four vessels of the Societe Anonyme 
Belge du Haut-Congo referred to, of which the largest is only, I 
believe, one of 30 tons, pay annually, I was informed, the following 
taxes : — 


TABEL, komt hier later bij afwerking 


Himself and each European member of the crew must then pay 30 fr. 
per annum as " imposition personnelle," whilst each native member 
of the crew costs his employers 3 fr. per head for engagement licence 
annually, and 10 fr. per head per annum as " imposition personnels." 


The "President Urban," the largest steamer of the Company referred 
to, under these various heads pays, I was informed, a sum of not less 
than 11,000 fr. in taxes per annum. Should she carry any of the agents 
of the Company owning her, or any of its goods, save within the 
restricted area of its Concession, her owners must pay to the Congo 
Government both passage money and freight on these, just as though 
they had been sent by one of the Government vessels. 


No firewood may be cut by the public within half-an-hour's steaming 
distance of any . of the Government wooding posts, which are 
naturally chosen at the best wooding, sites available along the various 
waterways, so that the 10,000 fr. wood- cutting licence which the " 
President Urban " pays entitles her only to cut up for uel such 
suitable timber as her crew may be able to find in the leas accessible 
spots. 


At F* I spent four days. I had visited this place in August 1887 when 
the line of villages comprising the settlement contained from 4,000 to 
5,000 people. Most of these villages to-day are entirely deserted, the 
forest having grown over the abandoned sites, and the entire 
community at the present date cannot number more than 500 souls. 
There is no Government station at F *, but the Government 
telegraph line which connects Leopoldville with Coquilhatville, the 
headquarters of the Equator district, runs through the once 


townlands of the F * villages close to the river bank. The people of 
the riverside towns, and from '20 miles inland, have to keep the lino 
clear of undergrowth, and in many places the telegraph road serves as 
a useful public path between neighbouring villages. Some of the 
natives of the neighbourhood complained that for this compulsory 
utilitarian service they had recetved no remuneration of any kind ; 
and those at a distance that they found it bard to feed themselves 
when far from their homes they were engaged on this task. Inquiry, 
in the neighbourhood established that no payment for this work had 
seemingly been made for fully a year. 


Men ate also required to work at the neighbouring wood-cutting post 
for the Government steamers, which is in charge of a native 
Headman or Kapita, who is under the surveillance of a European 
"Chef de Poste " at Bolobo, the nearest Government station, which 
lies about 40 miles up-stream. These wood-cutters, although required 
compulsorily to serve and sometimes irregularly detained, are 
adequately paid for their services. 


The F * villages have to supply kwanga (the prepared cassava root 
already referred to) for the neighbouring wood-cutting post, and the 
quantity required of them is, they asserted, in excess, of their means 
of supply and out of proportion to the value received in exchange. 
The supply required of them was fixed, I found, at 380 kwanga (or 
boiled cassava puddings) every six days, each pudding weighing from 
4 lb. to 6 lb., or a total of from 1,700 lb. to 1 ton weight of carefully 
prepared food- stuffs per week. Por this a payment of one brass rod 
per kwanga is made, giving a sum of 19 fr. in all for the several 
villages whose task it is to keep the wood post victualled. ‘These 
villages by careful computation I reckoned contained 240 persons all 
told — men, women, and children. In addition to preparing and 
carrying this food a considerable distance to the Government post, 
these people have to take their share in keeping the telegraph line 
clear and in supplying Government workmen. One elderly man was 
arrested at the period of my visit to serve as a soldier and was taken 
to Bolobo, 40 miles away, but was subsequently released upon 
representations made by a missionary who knew him. The number of 
wood-cutters at the local post is about thirty I was informed, so that 
the amount of food levied is beyond their , requirements, and the 


excess is said to be sold by them at a profit to the crews of passing 
steamers. At one of the smallest of these F* villages, where there are 
not more than ten persons all told, and only three of these women 
able to prepare and cook the food, 40 kwanga (180 lb. to 270 lb. 
weight of food) had to be supplied every week at a payment of 40 
rods (2 fr.). These people said: “How can we possibly plant and 
weed our gardens, seek and prepare and boil the cassava, make 
it into portable shape, and then carty it nearly a day's journey to 
the post ? Moreover, if the kwanga we make are a little small or 
not well-cooked, or if we complain that the rods given us in 
settlement are too short, as they sometimes are, then we are 
beaten by the woodcutters, and sometimes we are detained 
several days to cut firewood as a punishment." 


Statements of this kind might be tediously multiplied. 


The local mission station at F* requires much smaller kwanga than 
the Government size, getting from 1 lb. to 2 lb. weight of food at the 
same price viz., 1 rod. The kwanga made up for general 
consumption, as sold in local markets, weigh only about 1 Ib. each. 
The Government requires, delivered free, even at considerable 
distances, from four and a-half to six times the weight of prepared 
food to that sold- publicly for 1\2 d. 


In most parts of the Upper Congo the recognized currency consists 
of lengths of brass wire; these lengths varying according to the 
district. At one; period the recognized length of a brass rod was 18 
inches, but to-day the average length of a rod cannot be more than 8 
ot 9 inches. The nominal value of one of these rods is 1/2d. twenty 
of them being reckoned to the franc ; but the intrinsic value, or actual 
cost of a rod to any importer of the brass wire direct from Europe, 
would come to less than a 1/2d. I should say. Such as it is, clumsy 
and dirty, this is the principal form of currency known on the Upper 
Congo where, saving some parts of the French Congo I visited, 
European money is still quite unknown. 


The reasons for the decrease of population at F * given me, both by 
the natives and by others, point to sleeping sickness as probably one 
of the principal factors. There has also been emigration to the 


opposite side of the river, to the French shore, but this course has 
never, I gather, been popular. The people have not easily 
accommodated themselves to the altered condition of life brought 
about by European Government in their midst. Where formerly thsy 
were accustomed to take long voyages down to Stanley Pool to sell 
slaves, ivory, "dried fish, or other Jocal products against such 
European merchandise as the liateke middlemen around the Pool had 
to offer in exchange, ihe-y find themselves to-day debarred from all 
such form -<of activity. 


The open selling of slaves and the canoe convoys, which once 
navigated the Upper *.Congo, have everywhere disappeared. No act 
of the Congo State Government has 'perhaps produced more 
laudable results than the vigorous suppression of this wide- spread 
evil. In the 160 miles’ journey from Leopold ville to E * I did not see 
one large native canoe in mid-stream, and only a few small canoes 
creeping along the -shore near to native villages. While the 
suppression of an open form of slave dealing has been an undoubted 
gain, much that was not reprehensible in native life has dis- appeared 
along with it. The trade in ivory has to-day entirely passed from the 
hands of the natives of the Upper Congo, and neither fish nor any 
other outcome of local mindustry now changes hands on an extensive 
scale or at any distance from home. 


So far as I could observe in the limited time at my disposal, the 
people of F * now rarely leave their homes save when required by the 
local Government mofficial at Bolobo to serve as soldiers, or 
woodcutters at one of the Government posts, -or to convey the 
weekly supplies of food required of .them to the nearest Government 
station. These demands for food-stuffs comprise fowls and goats for 
consumption by dhe European members of the Government staff at 
Leopoldville, or for passengers on the Government steamers. They 
emanate from the Chief of the post at Bolobo who, I understand, is 
required in so far as he can, to keep up this supply. In order to obtain 
this provision he is forced to exercise continuous pressure on the 
local popula- tion, and within recent times that pressure has not 
always taken the form of mere requisition. Armed expeditions have 
been necessary and a more forcible method of levying supplies 
adopted than the law either contemplated or justifies. Very specific 


statements as to the harm one of these recent expeditions worked in 
the country around mF* were made to me during my stay there. The 
officer in command of the -G * district, at the head of a band of 
soldiers passed through a portion of the 


* district wherein the natives, unaccustomed to the duties expected of 


them, had bee| 
* backward in sending in both goats and fowls. 


The result of this expedition, which took place towards the end of 
1900, was that in fourteen small villages traversed seventeen persons 
disappeared. Sixteen of these whose names were given to me were 
killed by the soldiers, and their bodies recovered by their friends, and 
one was reported as missing. Of those killed eleven were men, ' three 
women, and one a boy child of 5 years. Ten persons were tied up and 
taken .;away as prisoners, but were released on payment of sixteen 
goats by their friends, except one, a child, who died at Bolobo. In 
addition 4S goats were taken away and 225 fowls ; .mseveral houses 
were burned, and a quantity of their owners' property either pillaged 
or destroyed. Representations on behalf of the injured villages were 
made to the Inspecteur d'Etat at Leopoldville, who greatly deplored 
the excesses of his subordinate, and sent to hold an inquiry and to 
pay compensation to the relatives of those killed and for the live- 
stock or goods destroyed or taken away. The local estimate of the 
damage done amounted to 71,730 brass rods (3, 5 SO fr.), which 
included 20,500 brass rods (1,025 it.), assessed as compensation for 
the seventeen people. Three of these were Chiefs, and the amount 
asked for would have worked out at about 1,000 brass rods (50 fr.) 
per head, not probably an extravagant estimate for human life, seeing 
that the goats were valued at 400 rods each (20 fr.), A total sum, 1 
was told, of 18,000 brass .rods (950 fr.) was actually paid to the 
injured villages by the Government Commis- sioner, who came from 
Stanley Pool ; and this sum, it was said, was levied as a fine for his 
misconduct on the official responsible for the raid. I could not learn 
what other form of punishment, if any, was inflicted on this officer. 
He remained as the Govern- ment Representative for some time 
afterwards, was then transferred to another post in the immediate 


neighbourhood, and finally went home at the expiration of his period 
of service. 


At Bolobo, where I spent ten days waiting for a steamer to continue 


my journey, 


